+++
title = "Seeking action against TANGEDCO and the Adani Group"
date = 2024-12-25
taxonomies.tags = ["politics"]
+++

[Arappor Iyakkam](https://arappor.org/) has called for a protest against the
Tamil Nadu State Government on January 5, 2025 at Valluvar Kottam, seeking
action against
[TANGEDCO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamil_Nadu_Generation_and_Distribution_Corporation)
and the Adani Group on the [sub-standard coal purchase
scam](https://www.occrp.org/en/investigation/new-evidence-bolsters-allegations-adani-group-overcharged-for-coal).

![India is not for
sale](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/GfAULtLaUAA8q2k?format=jpg&name=small)

There is no dearth of allegations of corruption, bribes, scams and fraud against
the [Adani Group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adani_Group)—more than half
their Wikipedia page is dedicated to them.

Now, many people say, this is all an international conspiracy to limit the growth
rate of India's GDP and prevent it from becoming a “superpower”. But, they give
the same answer even when I ask why the [value of the INR has fallen by more
than 30 %](https://www.google.com/finance/quote/USD-INR?hl=en&window=MAX), with
respect to the USD, from the day when Prime Minister [Narendra
Modi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Narendra_Modi) took office in 2014.

The INDIA coalition, of which the DMK is a part of, is [asking for a JPC probe
against the allegations on the Adani
Group](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/india-bloc-mps-hold-protest-in-parliament-complex-over-adani-issue-demand-jpc-probe/articleshow/115961485.cms)
in the wake of the [indictment against Gautam Adani et
al.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indictment_against_Gautam_Adani_et_al.) in a
US District Court.

Our Chief Minister [M. K. Stalin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M._K._Stalin),
who is part of this coalition had also been a vehement opposer of the “corrupt
Adani Group”, but it was before he was elected as CM in 2021. He hasn't shown
the same fervour now that he has the power to prosecute the corrupt. Would this
be the same that the Congress and Rahul Gandhi would do if elected to power?

This double faced politics and people's helplessness towards it, is very
dangerous. Crony capitalism at a different time, helped the East India Company
take over India. If we intend to retain our hard-earned freedom, we need to be
vigilant against it.

The focus on the TANGEDCO-Adani Coal Scam and the Chief
Minister M. K. Stalin is just a tool in the fight against this bigger problem.

In February 2018, the leader of the opposition Mr. M. K. Stalin, [demanded a
CBI probe on the alleged import of substandard coal by
TANGEDCO](https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/stalin-demands-cbi-probe-into-coal-import/article22696633.ece),
benefiting the Adani Group.  But after he became a CM in May 2021, the DVAC now
under him, had still not taken any action on the allegation.

In January 2023, Arappor Iyakkam brought the matter to focus by sending a
[letter to the CM demanding that the DVAC immediately register an FIR against
TANGEDCO](https://fuchsia-shallow-minnow-246.mypinata.cloud/ipfs/bafybeihj2qqqhejgp2cefetma67otfmou35sq76ffgycvy5kq7qdqpspkq)
officials and the Adani Group, and begin investigation.

On July 2, 2024, there was a report that the [DVAC has got the nod from the
State
Government](https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/tamil-nadu-probe-launched-into-coal-import-scam-involving-adani-group/article68359304.ece)
and had registered a preliminary enquiry on the allegations. In a few days on
July 9, Gautam Adani flew down to Chennai on a chartered plane and according to
a report in The Times of India, visited Chittaranjan Salai—the residence of CM
Stalin—and then left for a dinner meeting on the ECR, before returning home the same
night.

RTI requests by Arappor Iyakkam to the [DIPR](https://dipr.tn.gov.in/), gave a
[response that they did not have any information on Adani's
visit](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/GfDsMw3WwAATwKU?format=jpg&name=large),
although the Tamil Nadu Police was involved in the [security arrangements as
seen in this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Z6FyvphMGs)

Other political parties like BJP, PMK and DMDK have caught on to this scandal
and have used it to corner the DMK, while they themselves, do not support any
investigations on the Adani Group at the centre.

The entire Government and Political System seem to benefit from the Adani Group
and are afraid to act against them. In all these, the common man stands to lose
the most.

We feel pained by all these and want to do something to change
the situation, but do not know what to do.

In a Democracy, political parties are still at the mercy of elections, votes and
ultimately the people (though there are attempts to weaken this power through
the [One Nation, One
Election](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One_Nation,_One_Election) proposal).
They still fear them more than any Adani, but we fail to raise our voice loud
enough to reach their ears. [Peaceful
protests](https://nyaaya.org/resource/guide-to-lawful-protesting/) and
demonstrations are the loudest alarm bells, while views, likes and comments on
social media are sweet lullabies.

I hope, if you read this before January 5, you will join me at Valluvar Kottam
to stand with Arappor Iyakkam and make our voices heard.