+++
title = "Vacant Land Tax"
taxonomies.tags = ["life"]
date = 2024-08-10
draft=true
+++

Looks like the Chennai Corporation (now called Greater Chennai
Corporation or GCC), started imposing a tax on vacant land to
discourage land hoarders and increasing their revenue, starting from the year 2017.
Another simple way to pass on generational wealth that was accessible to the
common man became less economical, but I do think it is overall a positive
initiative for the society. The vacant land tax seems to also be levied by other
urban bodies in Tamil Nadu, and the other states too.

https://chennaicorporation.gov.in/gcc/online-services/

I inherited one such parcel of land and had to pay my dues before I could
exercise my rights to develop it. But as usual this straight forward task was
made needlessly tedious by our government officers and politicians.

The Chennai Corporation's Revenue Department has very [detailed information on
their
website](https://chennaicorporation.gov.in/gcc/department/revenue/#revenue)
explaining the procedure and how the tax is calculated. I was able to find the
[Basic Street Rate, which is abbreviated as BSR, for zone
13](http://www.chennaicorporation.gov.in/departments/revenue/StreetRates/Z-13%20STREETRATE.pdf)
and able to calculate the tax using the procedure given there.

Then I found a document explaining the [SOP for all revenue department
procedures](https://chennaicorporation.gov.in/gcc/SOP/REVENUE_SOP.pdf) which
provided [this website where online requests for various GCC services can be
made](https://erp.chennaicorporation.gov.in/e-portal/login.do).

So far, so good and I was happy with our Digital India!

But when I completed the form and tried to submit the application, I got a 502
error. Looks like our officials had made the online process dysfunctional as
what is convenient for the citizen, is likely not so for them.

There was a paper form for new tax assessment that came up in search results,
but it had umpteen columns and details, that I decided to go to the [zonal
office in Adyar](https://maps.app.goo.gl/mbHyH4KNGTREYzTt5) to enquire. I have
too many scars from highly educated lab staff throwing my carefully written
record out, for not having satisfied their specific formats. Yes, they had a
government job and they new it comes with some perks. No one can take it away
from them.


As any government office, there was simply no recognition of someone having
entered. Everyone carried on with their _work_. I felt like a ghost or should I
say, the invisible man.

I slowly assessed who might be annoyed the least, if I disturbed them. I saw a
slightly older person than me, sitting nearest to the entrance, looking busily
at files and decided he would be my best bet.

I approached him and he replied tersely asking me to give the letter to the
person on the desk in the center of the room. I once again confirmed from him
whether a form is required or just a letter would do and what documents I needed
to submit.

He was a bit more detailed and asked me to submit the sale deed, patta and not
forget to attach the EC. Now EC stood for Encumberance Certificate, a document
that provides the list of transactions pertaining to a specific survey number. 

Satisfied, I returned home and had the most important question of who the letter
needs to be addressed to. I went through documents that I had and the SOP
mentioned the _Assistant Revenue Officer_ in a number of places and I decided to
address them.

You can find the [format of the letter I had used here]().

The full details of the [internal procedure has been documented
here](https://tnswp.com/DIGIGOV/StaticAttachment?AttachmentFileName=/procedure/pre_op/PO_34.pdf),
but clearly the digital part is not being followed as I never received the SMS
for the notice at any step.


After submitting the letter, I went to the Zonal office once again after a week
and enquired at the mail desk. That person asked me to contact the assessor and
gave me the number. I called him up and he asked to come by the local
corporation office at Brindavan Nagar Main Road. When I reached there and called
him, he said, the letter has not reached his desk and he will call me once it
reaches him. I went back home nervously waiting for the call. In a few days, he
called asking what the plot number was, and that the Nagar that is mentioned is
wrong. I explained to him that, it was an unapproved layout and the name used
for the layout is no longer used by his department, which is something he should
have known. Then he asked me to submit a copy of the parent sale deed which is
likely to have the plot number.

I took the document copy to Brindavan Nagar Main Road office and gave it to one
clerk who was there as the assessor said he was in a different office.

In a few days, he called me with the assessed amount which came out to the same
that the clerk mentioned. I had not given any bribe amount till now, and the
assessor also did not ask anything, but I was able to sense that expectation
from both the assessor and the clerk.

SLA for the assessment was 30 days.

I was thinking through on why he was requiring a DD, when the SOP clearly said
that the assessor would raise the notice for tax with the bill number and we
could pay it through a number of channels including, online payment or swipe a
card at one of the ward offices. The amount that I had to pay was Rs. 23,200,
which was significant and once I gave the DD to the assessor, he had the upper
hand and he could simply raise the bill and say I never gave him the DD.
I was afraid if it was their modus operandi to a bribe.

When I asked my mom, if in her experience, giving a DD is reasonable thing to do
at this point. She assured me that government officers will not do such things.
This sounded very naive. Then she said, they will write your name and the bill
number in the back of the DD and that should ensure that, the DD cannot be
misused to pay tax for someone else. This sounded like a better advice.

I made up my mind to take a photo copy and also write my name myself on the back
of the DD. The next day when I took the DD, I hurried to the corporation office
and had forgotten to take a xerox nor write my details in the back of the DD.
What a stupid thing to do. I gave the DD to the assessor, who looked at it and
asked, how come you have come today, when you said, you were going out of town.
I quickly answered saying I changed my plan as I couldn't make him wait and
waste his time. He took the DD, wrote my name and phone number in the back and
put it in his drawer saying, that the bill will be ready in a day or two and I
will receive an SMS. I can then collect the receipt from the office.

He did not ask for any bribe or give any direct hint, but he was surely curt in
his reply and not friendly.

I realized my mistake of having given the DD without taking a photo copy and was
a little worried. But decided to leave it at this and call the assessor only
after a couple of days. Soon, I got busy with other work and on the second day,
I got a call from the assessor saying my bill was ready and I could collect it
from the corporation office near the Dhandeeswaram temple in Velachery. 

I was familiar with the place but never knew that a corporation office existed
there. I asked a local person on reaching the place and he pointed to the
building, which is not easy to miss, once you start to look for it.

I went inside, and the assessor was sitting behind a counter with a computer. It
looked like his primary work location was this office. He was on the phone with
someone, but on seeing me, he took a printout of the bill copy, stamped and
signed it while still multi tasking ont he phone.

Then he finished the phone call and asked me to pay additional late fee which he
had missed to quote earlier. I asked if I should pay cash and he quickly
retorted, that there was no work for cash going forward and everything was
online. He asked if I had a debit card which can be used in the swiping machine
that was in the counter.

Feeling happy at the turn of events, I quickly paid, the amount and dropped a
thanks to the person who swiped the card and the assessor for their work. By
this time, I think the assessor was at his nerve's end. He scolded me saying
"You come and go so many times for this work, but you never think of giving us
something for our expenses. Give at least Rs. 1000 to him" and pointed at the
officer who swiped my card.

I was a bit ashamed on hearing it and I asked the person to come outside the
office. There I took two Rs. 500 rupees notes and gave it to him. Seems like my
entire analytical brain had been suppressed by the emotions of shame, pity and
thankfulness.

Thinking through this episode, I could have probably saved myself a lot of work
and money by going directly to the assessor, dropping the letter along with a
Rs. 500 note. But would I do it? No.

I think it is better to give the application in the Zonal office, where I get an
acknowledgement with the date of submission. It is likely that the SLA of 30
days is being tracked which is why the assessor finished the work without me
pushing for it. A likely change to try is to ask for online payment instead of
the DD. At this point he is likely to demand a bribe for the supposed additional
work he has to do let me pay the entire amount online or through a debit card at
the counter. But I think it is better to pay the bribe at that point. Although
my mom is likely true in that, government officers do no go to the extent of
lying at least for such small amounts, I think the DD business is so archaic and
one which gives more power to the officers.

**Check how to refund a DD or provide an evidence of payment**